Blogpost - Test-Frame introduction (#15)
skodjob/blog: posts/tools/test-frame-introduction.md

---
title: Make your testing easier with Test-Frame
menu_order: 1
post_status: publish
post_excerpt: Introduction to Test-Frame - what it is, why you should use it
featured_image: _images/test-frame-introduction.jpg
author: lkral
taxonomy:
  category:
    - tools
---

## Testing of applications running on Kubernetes

> Today, there are multiple popular languages that are used for writing Kube-native applications.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Today, multiple popular languages are used for writing Kube-native application
```

> The most popular are Java and Go, mainly in the development of applications based on [operator pattern](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/extend-kubernetes/operator/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The most popular are Java and Go, mainly in developing applications based on the [operator pattern](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/extend-kubernetes/operator/).
```

> The most popular are Java and Go, mainly in the development of applications based on [operator pattern](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/extend-kubernetes/operator/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The most popular are Java and Go, mainly in developing applications based on [operator pattern](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/extend-kubernetes/operator/).
```

> Additionally, there are multiple libraries for both of the aforementioned languages, which make the work

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 Additionally, there are multiple libraries for both aforementioned languages, making work
```

> Additionally, there are multiple libraries for both of the aforementioned languages, which make the work

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Additionally, there are multiple libraries for both of the languages mentioned above, which make the work
```

> with Kubernetes API much easier.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
with the Kubernetes API much easier.
```

direct communication with Kubernetes API.
Because of this library (and also many others like [JUnit5](https://junit.org/junit5/)),
we decided to write the test suite in Java, which is also the language that our
application is written in.

## Creating a test-suite

In the beginning, you start with observing what is needed during each phase of the test case.
You can start with the setup needed before the test execution.
Then, during the test case, you can create and delete the Kubernetes resources, do operations
that your application allows, check logs of the Pod, validate results, and clean-up the environment after
the test case.

Having a clean-up phase in every test case is sufficient when you have just a few test cases.
But once you are writing more and more tests, it starts to be boring and repetitive when you
have to clean the resources at the end of each test.

To make your life easier, you create a mechanism that will store the resources created in the test
and once the test is completed, it will clear everything based on the LIFO mechanism.

Great, what about the situation when the test fails?
You would have to simulate the same environment and situation in which it failed.

> But sometimes, it is not that simple to reproduce the exact behavior.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
But sometimes, it is more complicated to reproduce the exact behavior.
```

Author: removed this section

> Because of this, you create another mechanism for collecting logs, description of resources, and many more,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Because of this, you create another mechanism for collecting logs, describing resources, and many more,
```

Author: removed this section

> that will be executed in case of the test failure.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
that will be executed in case of a test failure.
```

Author: removed this section

> All of these will be mostly stored in the repository where you are writing the tests, which makes sense

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All of these will be primarily stored in the repository where you are writing the tests, which makes sense
```

Author: removed this section

and it is the best possible solution at that moment.

## More repositories, more redundancy

> In case we have just one repository where all the testing is done, everything is fine.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In case when we have just one repository where all the testing is done, everything is fine.
```

Author: removed this sentence

> But once we want to extend the product and add new components that will also need system testing,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, once we want to extend the product and add new components with it's own system testing.
Once this situation come you will start the never ending battle with reduncancy a basically accept the fact that 
you will use **ctrl-c** quite often during the test development.
```

IMHO these two paragraphs sound wierd to me. Added small suggestion that would need little bit of work to include it.

Author: together with @novotnyJiri we ended up with this:
```
However, once we want to extend the product and add new components that will also need system testing,
we start a fight with redundancy, where you will need to copy the testing-related classes across multiple repositories,
mixing things and always trying to refactor the code without success.
```

we start a fight with redundancy.
And, one day, you will find yourself copying the testing-related classes across multiple repositories,
mixing things and always trying to refactor the code without success and without "the light at the end of the tunnel" that
there will be an end to this.
At least, that is the situation in which we ended up.

Yes, you can use the test classes from the main repository as a Maven dependency, in case you are releasing it together
with other modules to the Maven Central (or anywhere else).
However, there are situations when you cannot do that - one of the examples is cyclic dependency.

> Let's say that you have the main repository, containing the code for an operator, and you have a few other repositories for the components that

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's say you have the main repository containing the code for an operator and a few other repositories for the components
```

> are managed by the operator.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 managed by the operator.
```
Only suitable together with a previous suggestion...

> Each of the components has a different release cadence, so having them in the operator's repository is not the correct approach.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Each component has a different release cadence, so having them in the operator's repository is not the correct approach.
```

> In this particular case, if you would use the "system test" dependency from the operator's repository inside the component's repository (and the component

Reviewer 2: Wouldn't it be better to create very simple diagram to display this dependency issue. I believe that some people might be lost here.

Author: done, thanks

> In this particular case, if you would use the "system test" dependency from the operator's repository inside the component's repository (and the component

Reviewer 3: Wouldn't be better to use `system test` instead of "" ?

Author: removed "", but it's not a name of module or something, so i didn't use the ``

is used inside the operator's repository), then you create a cyclic dependency, where the component waits for the release of the operator
with new things in the test classes, and the operator waits for the component to be released, so it can be included in the controller's code.

Or, you can have one repository for the test logic, that will be shared across multiple repositories, and thanks to that you will remove
the cyclic dependency.
Nevertheless, with a new separate repository, there are different challenges.
You need to think about how well it will be maintained - do you and your team have time to actively contribute to this repository and release a new
version of it regularly, without breaking the logic of the test suites in each of the repositories?

> How frequent will be the releases?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
How frequent will the releases be?
```

> What about the situation when you work on different repositories outside of the current organization and this module cannot be imported?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
What about the situation when you work on different repositories outside the current organization and this module cannot be imported?
```

## Test-Frame as the solution

> Because Skodjob consists of engineers working on different projects, but with the same passion for testing the integration between the components,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Because **Skodjob** consists of engineers working on different projects but with the same passion for testing the integration between the components,
```

> we were finding a proper solution for sharing the code between organizations, that would help us with removing redundancy and duplicated code, which

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
we were finding a proper solution for sharing the code between organizations that would help us with removing redundancy and duplicated code, which
```

was anyway present throughout the repositories.

> And because we had the same questions I mentioned in the previous section, we decided to create a library called [Test-Frame](https://github.com/skodjob/test-frame/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Given these questions, we decided to create a library called [Test-Frame](https://github.com/skodjob/test-frame/).
```

> And because we had the same questions I mentioned in the previous section, we decided to create a library called [Test-Frame](https://github.com/skodjob/test-frame/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
And because we had the same questions I mentioned in the previous section, we created a library called [Test-Frame](https://github.com/skodjob/test-frame/).
```

Author: why the sentence as it is doesn't make sense?

> The library aims to provide basic functionality for testing applications running on Kubernetes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The library aims to provide common functionality for testing applications running on Kubernetes.
```

It also tries to make the overall process as easy as possible.

### What it provides?

> The core of the Test-Frame is `KubeResourceManager` which is responsible for the management of resources during the test phases.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The core of the Test-Frame is `KubeResourceManager`, which is responsible for managing resources during the test phases.
```

> For its functioning, we need to pass Fabric8-based objects, that are extending the `HasMetadata` class, to it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For it to function, we need to pass Fabric8-based objects that extend the `HasMetadata` class to it.
```

Author: `For it to function` seems weird, the current sentence makes sense. Or maybe start the sentence differently 🤷

Reviewer 4: Maybe rewrite to something like `It handles Fabric8-based objects, that are extending the HasMetadata class` 🤷

Author: looks good, thanks

> Depending on the `ExtensionContext`, `KubeResourceManager` creates a new stack for each context, where it stores all resources created in the test case.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Depending on the `ExtensionContext`, `KubeResourceManager` creates a new stack for each context, where it stores all resources created in the test case.
```

After the test is finished (no matter if it failed or passed), `KubeResourceManager` deletes the resources in reverse order, following the LIFO
method.

> This removes the need for "manual" clean-up after each test case and overall management of the resources.

Reviewer 3: Same as above with ""

Author: removed "", but it's not a name of module or something, so i didn't use the ``

> Besides that, Test-Frame provides classes for easier handling of basic Kubernetes resources, such as Secret, Service, NetworkPolicy, and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Besides that, Test-Frame provides classes for easier handling of fundamental Kubernetes resources, such as Secret, Service, NetworkPolicy,
```

Author: ` and` here makes sense, as it's continuing on next line

many more.

> It also has built-in `KubeClient`, which creates a basic encapsulation around the Fabric8's client, together with the possibility to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It also has a built-in `KubeClient`, which creates a basic encapsulation around Fabric8's client. It also allows you to specify `KUBE_CONTEXT` for the cluster where the tests should be executed.
```

Author: I think that having `It also` in two sentences doesn't look good, so I would keep it as it is (with addition of `a` and other stuff)

specify `KUBE_CONTEXT` for the cluster where the tests should be executed.

> The library is still under development, we are planning to add more functionality like a log collector (which will collect also YAMLs of resources, Pod description, and more)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The library is still under development, and we are planning to add more functionality like a log collector (which will collect also YAMLs of resources, Pod description, and more)
```

or metrics collector, for easier gathering metrics from the pre-defined endpoints.

### How I can use it?

During the development, the Test-Frame library is being pushed to GitHub's Maven repository.

> So in case you would like to try the Test-Frame in your test suite before it is released, you can do that by including

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you would like to try the Test-Frame in your test suite before it is released, you can do that by including
```

Because we are pulling a dependency from the GitHub Maven repository, we need to provide an additional configuration in the `settings.xml`:

```xml
<settings>
    <servers>
        <server>
            <id>test-frame</id>
            <username>x-access-token</username>
            <password>${env.GITHUB_TOKEN}</password>
        </server>
    </servers>
</settings>
```

Where the `id` of the server has to match with the `id` of the repository in the `pom.xml`.

Once you are all set, you can try to experiment with the library in the tests by annotating the test classes with
`@ResourceManager` annotation, determining that the `KubeResourceManager` should manage the resources created in the tests.

```java
@ResourceManager
class NamespaceCreationST {
    
    @Test
    void testThatNamespaceExists() {
        KubeResourceManager.getInstance().createResourceWithWait(
                new NamespaceBuilder().withNewMetadata().withName("test").endMetadata().build());
        assertNotNull(KubeResourceManager.getKubeCmdClient().get("namespace", "test"));
    }

> }

Reviewer: Should we add a more comprehensive example?

Author: I thought about it for a while, but this should be just intro. I added there link to the GH repo, where are more examples. Maybe we should write more than just README (so maybe small docs), which will contain more of the examples.

```

In this example, the Namespace with the name `test` is created in the test case `testThatNamespaceExists`, and after the test
is finished, it is also deleted by the `KubeResourceManager`.
This will ensure that the Namespace will not affect any other tests, which will start again in a clean environment.

## Conclusion

> The process of writing tests with all kinds of helper classes and methods can be a repetitive task filled with duplicates and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Writing tests with all kinds of helper classes and methods can be a repetitive task filled with duplicates and 
```

redundancy when it comes to a project containing multiple repositories that need testing.
But Test-Frame, a library providing common helper methods for work with tests and objects running on Kubernetes, is here
to help you with it.

> Let us know how you like the library or what would you like to see next.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let us know how you like the library or what you want to see next.
```

> Your feedback is welcome!

Reviewer 2: I think we could also add a note that we welcome all the contributions or something like that.
